2019-04-24-DrKentHovindVSDrTrivers.md

Wow thank you for the invitation mr.
Glenn Airy and thank you mr. Hoban for
taking time out from your divinities to
share your latest thoughts with us I'm
not here to defend the theory of
evolution I'm here to present a little
bit of the evidence that supports the
theory it is supported by an
overwhelming number of scientists
contrary to what mr. Glenn Airy has
already asserted now I'm going to talk
on fossils and I'm going to talk on
genetics I want to talk on fossils for
the first 15 minutes because I believe
they're the key to this subject if there
were no fossils at all I'm not sure we
would be here today I'm sure that it
would have taken Darwin a good bit
longer to figure out a theory of
evolution imagine that creatures happen
to just vaporize when they died so they
left no traces at all that's just a
property of life and we're aware of it
we know that we don't expect fossils but
still there's an absence of evidence
from the past that's disturbing well
that's not the case
creatures don't vaporize when they died
and they often leave imprints which get
covered up and are maintained over long
periods of time now you may not know or
guess how many fossils have been
discovered in the last 150 200 years but
there are well over a hundred billion
fossils that have been discovered there
is one fossil field in which says it's
estimated this is 80 billion vertebrate
fossils alone there are tens of millions
of fossils that have been catalogued
described dug up and deposited in
museums and similar institutions around
the world and they've been studied
whatever else you want to say about
evolution
that haven't been lazy they've been
doing their work now what is this huge
fossil record tell us it tells us
several important things first of all it
tells us that 99.9% of all species are
extinct that is the fossil record
largely consists of creatures that have
that are not existing today that have no
counterpart today but are different
kinds of creatures dinosaurs for example
okay so for every one species today
there were a thousand that went extinct
furthermore the fossil record you know
I'm wondering if this thing is causing
the feedback here okay there's a little
bit of kind of feedback loop here anyway
if you look at the fossils they're
organized vertically with as we
understand that the top layers being
more recently deposited than the deeper
layers and with some exceptions of
course the general rule is that simpler
more congruent and smaller species are
located lower down in the fossil record
by congruent I mean species that fall in
between species that you would find
today for example so you can go back and
I'll tell you about dating in a moment
to about 150 million years ago and you
find that mammals converge on a
mammal-like reptile if you take all land
vertebrates they converge to a fish that
resembles a coelacanth the lobe-finned
fish now the third thing that's worth
mentioning is it's same pattern has
found the world over again with
exceptions but you can line up
straighter in Australia you can line up
strata in Europe you can line up
straight in North America and you find
similar sets of creatures as you go down
similar levels now this pattern alone
no other argumentation suggests that
once evolution through time because you
expect creatures to begin small simple
and congruent you expect higher strata
to be more recently deposited you expect
creatures to become more complex over
time to increase an average size over
time and to diverge which is exactly
what the fossil record shows now in
addition we have a completely
independent system for timing these
fossils and this is dating that systems
that's been developed by a geologist
based on chemistry and physics it has to
do with the radioactive decay of
unstable isotopes so for example
carbon-14 is produced we know in the
outer atmosphere it is taken up by
living creatures but it decays however
in the living creature it reaches a
steady state because it's continually
taking in new carbon-14 and the steady
states are well studied when it dies it
no longer takes in any calcium 14 the
calcium 14 in it just decays and it
decays so far as we know at a steady
rate calcium 14 is only good back to
about 50,000 years it has a half-life of
about 5500 years
now at the other extreme you have
potassium argon which has a half-life of
about a billion years and is good for
timing events from a hundred thousand
years right on back to a billion more
than a billion you have dozens of other
chemical systems which have inner media
timescales over which they work well and
you have overlap among these systems and
you can look to see whether you're
dating systems give you congruent
results and they do indeed it is not
true if you use carbon-14 and another
method that's also good for 50,000 years
that you get divergent results you get
congruent results so we have some
confidence that were able to date these
strata and we also show through the
dating that the assumption that more
higher-up deposits
more recently deposited show less decay
the system even works for tree rings
there trees there are four or five
thousand years old whose age can be
counted by rings and by which you can
check to see whether carbon-14 for
example is working now at the time of
Darwin there was a sufficient fossil
record so that devout Christians who
were also serious scientists had to
imagine 20 separate creations followed
by 19 obliteration 'z the most recent
creation being the one we're living in
in order to make it consistent with a
simple minded reading of certain
sections of the Bible after a while it
becomes easier to imagine that God lets
the world evolve than to put him or her
to the work of continually creating and
say whoops I got that slightly wrong
destroy the whole thing start over you'd
have to have tens of thousands of
separate creations and one less
obliteration to fit the data according
to this theory now along comes this
character and he says hey I can solve
this what about the flood so he imagines
that the flood miraculously killed off
the earlier creatures apparently Noah
violated instructions because he
discriminated against dinosaurs and
other creatures with nostrils didn't
allow him on the ark and somehow
deposited these dead creatures in this
highly organized pattern we see repeated
the world over now this violates
expectation if you see if you think
about these dead creatures swirling
around in this dreadful flood you'd
expect heavier creatures to fall deeper
for example you don't the heaviest
mammals are right at the top the
dinosaurs are 150 million years old
they're not way down there at the bottom
at say a half a billion so this view is
on its face in just trying to describe
the actual evidence we have on the
existence of fossils but matters only
get worse if you take this thing
seriously and that's what scientists do
and they do calculations so they say
okay you want to believe in this how
hard does it have to rain in 40 days and
40 nights to fill this water up to the
point where it can then explain all the
fossils what has to rain about 11 feet
an hour by comparison a 1 inch an hour
is a heavy downfall one inch an hour for
24 hours causes Hills to give way but
you're talking about a rainfall that's 2
inches a minute it's a rainfall you've
never seen and can't even imagine you'd
walk out and splash you'd be on the
ground from that amount of water flowing
down matters get only worse I didn't
know before preparing for this debate or
whatever it is that well what it rains
heat is released and someone sat down
and then the calculation well if you
have this monstrous level of rain
occurring you have an enormous release
of heat and the calculation is that the
resulting water is roughly between two
and six thousand degrees a boiling
cauldron of water produced by this
vision of noah's flood killing off
marine fish freshwater fish all kinds of
vegetation beneath and so on and yet
somehow magically 6,000 years ago the
water all managed to evaporate back down
to our Placid level of existence right
now now there are big absurdities and
they're small ones a small absurdity has
to do with fossil footprints I've seen
hominid fossil footprints and all of our
gorge dated 3 million years ago look
human but they're smaller I've seen
dinosaur footprints I've seen bird
footprints how on earth are all these
creatures able to leave footprints with
this mass of rain coming down scouring
whole Hills down to nothing but
magically leaving the fossil footprints
then you've got other problems the
fossil records show that recent
creatures in the fossil record just
below the top are located where the
current ones are so you find marsupial
fossils in Australia now how do you
assemble these creatures Noah sends word
I need two lions from the Serengeti male
and female I need to kinda Rouge from
Australia and don't exhaust yourself on
the trip here by the way because you've
got a hell of a trip back you're going
to be walking on mud hundreds of feet
deep just to get back to where you
belong and matters are worse still what
about disease almost all human diseases
have to live inside humans there are
some like malaria that have a mosquito
intermediate host but the rest go just
human to human
so those ten humans on Noah's Ark have
got to have between them all the human
diseases of course if you've got a
creative mind and unconstrained by
reality you can invent an ad hoc
hypothesis for that out how the
disease's came from other creatures but
they left no remnants back in those
other creatures our diseases do not
resemble close to the diseases of other
creatures and the same argument that
applies to us applies to every one of
the other species on the ark - in other
words when they call for two lions from
the Serengeti they saying be sure one is
bringing half of all lion diseases and
the others bring in the other half sick
unto death they have to be to maintain
biological diversity of diseases so to
summarize with we're being asked to
replace a coherent logical story based
on millions
pieces of evidence carefully analyzed
and organized and and are offered
instead a fanciful tale with a dreadful
view of God's world a cataclysmic world
a disaster of unimaginable proportions
which nevertheless had the magical power
to splat produce a fossil record that
imitated what you'd expect if evolution
took place I thank you
[Applause]
all right well thank you it's an honor
to be here and I appreciate dr. Traverse
coming it is extremely difficult to find
professors willing to defend the
evolution theory and turn down over
3,000 times this has just had a few
debates I'm just a simple high school
science teacher that is sick and tired
of the kids being lied to in their
textbooks so we'll cover all the points
that you made as time permits see if I
forget what bring it up during the
question answer session okay let's see
let me present the creation viewpoint
clearly and succinctly so people say you
don't have a because don't have a model
that you offer yes we do it's very
simple God created everything about six
thousand years ago in six literal
24-hour days this is the only possible
way that I can see to explain what are
called symbiosis relationships where
thousands of animals require certain
plants or certain plants require certain
animals for instance in the termites gut
there's a little critter that lives in
there that cannot live outside the
termite the term a termite cannot live
without that little critter in there
which one evolve first and how did it
live for millions of years without the
other one that is only one of literally
billions of examples that can be found
in nature that are best explained by a
simultaneous creation just in a few
short days then I believed there was a
worldwide flood about forty four hundred
years ago that completely destroyed this
planet I think that's the only logical
way to explain the fossils there's a
phenomenon that come takes place during
floods called a cavitation and another
one called a liquefaction when getting
it more that later um if you shake up a
jar of dirt with water and it'll
automatically settle into layers for you
and it's interesting during a
liquefaction when if you go out to the
beach like I live in Florida six miles
from the beach if you go stand knee-deep
in the water as the waves come by the
high part of the wave is lower is is
higher and heavier than the low part of
the wave this presses down on the sand
and then when the low part comes by it
relieves the pressure and if you go
underwater with goggles you can actually
see the sand grains hopping up off the
bottom and particles are automatically
sorted based upon their density just by
the pressure of the waves coming past
during Noah's Flood you'd get a
liquefaction problem that would be
incredible because you'd have no no
continents to restrict the tides and the
tides would be probably a 200-foot tidal
change during Noah's Flood explaining
the sorting of the fossil record
reptiles are found in a similar layer
reptiles have similar body density
there's a lot of reasons we'll get into
more that later so the Bible view
teaches that before the flood came the
people lived to be 900 years old there
are thousands of legends from around the
world of cultures talking about what
they called the Golden Age when people
used to live to be a thousand I mean the
Greeks talked about it the Babylonians
the Sumerians and the Bible certainly
says Adam was 930 when he died and
everybody before the flood lived over
900 years reptiles never stopped growing
and as well as squids and most octopus
and stuff like that they simply never
stopped growing so I believe before the
flood came the reptiles grew to be huge
and dinosaurs were big lizards that
lived with Adam and Eve in the Garden of
Eden just giant lizards and then Noah
took him on the ark probably babies he
was smart enough to figure out just
bring two babies be sure to get a pink
one and a blue one though and so that's
the Bible view the dinosaurs were called
dragons the most of history since the
word dinosaur wasn't invented till 1841
and people throughout the last six
thousand years have killed nearly all of
them there may be a few stragglers still
around there certainly been a lot of
sightings of various creatures that's
the study of cryptozoology there's a
couple pictures of ones that washed up
on the beach in California in 1925 on my
website if you care to go there so
science means knowledge to know it is
systemized knowledge derived from
observation and study there is no
observation that tells us a dog ever
came from an on dog now if you'd like to
believe that that's perfectly fine but
that is not science
evolution whatever it is is not science
it is a religious worldview that people
choose to believe in and that's
perfectly fine you can believe whatever
you want but I for one am sick and tired
of them takin our tax dollars to teach
this religion in our school system
that's my take on it
[Applause]
I am I'm certainly not against science I
like science I like it very much as a
matter of fact we have a science center
a hands-on activity center we have a
museum we have all kinds of activities
for kids we actually like science I
don't know any Christians that don't
like science there may be some but I
don't know them
I like science but I'm sick of the kids
getting allied too now Texas has a law
that requires the textbooks to be
accurate so does Florida so does
Wisconsin
so does Alabama so does California most
states require textbooks to be accurate
all I want is accuracy in the textbooks
all of the evidence that's used to
support the evolution theory has been
proven fraudulent and I'll take any bit
of evidence you want we'll show you
which one it is they use all sorts at
about 50 different things they don't
have time in 15 minutes obviously but
this fellow says evolution is a fact
this is called a mantra you say it over
and over and over I'm pretty soon you
start believing it he says the evidence
for evolution comes from the fossil
record the fossil record provides some
of the strongest evidence that species
evolved over time I would like to point
out if evolution were on trial in a
court of law absolutely no fossils would
count because you can't prove those
bones had any kids you sure can't prove
they had different kids and why on earth
would you think a bone you found in the
dirt can do something animals today
cannot do which is produce something
other than their kind by the way there
is no fossil record you don't look back
in the fossil record you look at fossils
you put an interpretation on them but
they don't come with a date on them and
they don't come with a card saying this
was minnow made by a dinosaur 80 million
years ago so that when somebody says we
looked back in the fossil record on
either look back and then you dig up a
fossil and it's 2003 okay you're putting
your interpretation on that bone but you
don't know for sure when that thing
lived the word evolution has six
different totally unrelated meanings
first they would have to be cosmic
evolution this is a major obstacle the
evolutionist have to overcome you have
to have somehow the beginning of time
space and matter
the Bible answers that in ten words in
the beginning God created the heaven in
the earth then you have to have chemical
evolution I've never had an evolutionist
tackle this one I wish they would
because if the Big Bang Theory is true
the Big Bang made hydrogen and possibly
some helium well how did we get 92
elements plus the synthetic ones I know
you confuse them in stars but then you
got to get you can't get past an iron
with fusion so you got a real problem
here
and then we'd have to have stellar
evolution stars would have to evolve
nobody's ever seen a star farm they've
seen a couple of spots get brighter and
they accept oh wow star forming you
don't know what stars for me it could be
the dust is clearing there's a star
behind it there's no proof any stars
ever formed out there in space that
we've seen form but we see them blow up
all the time they're called Nova's or
supernovas that's the opposite of
evolution it's backwards there's enough
stars out there that everybody can own
two trillion of them to yourself I mean
it's not like there's a lack of stars to
go around those are just those are the
ones we know about we don't know about
the ones that we don't know about then
we'd have to have what's called organic
evolution somehow somewhere long ago and
far away life has to get started from
nonliving material the evolutionist is
left with a very embarrassing position
in believing something that's been
proven wrong for over 100 years he still
believes in spontaneous generation life
had to get started from nonliving
material I don't I don't hear about all
the experiments you say well it might
have happened or we might be able to do
it someday it's back to the matter is
it's a religious belief you have to
believe that it happened and you're
welcome to keep that belief I don't care
what you believe but don't call it
science and don't make everybody else
learn that junk you keep it at home or
start your own private school and teach
evolution anybody that wants to pay and
come learn it okay then we have what's
called macro evolution where as an
animal changes from one kind to another
nobody has ever seen a dog produce an on
dog never Sciences things we can observe
and test and demonstrate all of human
history shows us dogs produced dogs
period micro evolution I think is a
lousy word and we shouldn't use it but
they do so I'm gonna explain what it
means it actually means just a variation
within the kind variation certainly
happens sometimes some real bizarre
variations happen but they're still the
same kind the first five meanings of the
word are purely religious what happens
though students are given one definition
of this word evolution and then they
switch the definition on them called
bait-and-switch according the Big Bang
Theory eighteen to twenty billion years
ago all the matter in the universe was
concentrated into one very dense very
hot region that may have been much
smaller than a period on this page man s
one crowded dot
for some unknown reason this region
exploded it's called the Big Bang they
cut down a tree to print that where is
Al Gore when you need him that's what I
wanna know yeah this textbook says 4.6
billion years ago the earth cooled and
Iraqis in formed a rocky crust yes boys
and girls the planet Earth cold and a
rocky surface was created and then as
the earth formed the surface was similar
to the moon it was hot and there were
large pools of bubbling lava oceans
formed as it rained on the rocks for
millions a year yes millions of years of
torrential rains created great oceans
and swirling in the waters of the oceans
is a bubbling broth of complex chemicals
progress from a complex chemical soup to
a living organism is very slow well I
guess it is doesn't even happen that's
how slow it is this college textbook
says the first self-replicating systems
must have emerged in this organic soup
so I think a fair representation of the
evolution theory would be 20 billion
years ago there was a big bang some safe
16 15 whatever the number you pick it
okay and then 4.6 billion years ago the
earth formed and it rained on the rocks
for millions of years and turn them into
soup and the soup came alive somewhere
around 3 to 3.8 billion years ago and
this first life form found somebody to
marry there's a good trick and something
to eat of course and slowly evolved into
everything we see today so great great
great great great great great great
grandpa what's ooh
[Applause]
I uh spoke at a college in Boston one
time and they said you I can speak to
the college if their professors can ask
me any questions they want because they
wanted to show the students how dumb the
Christians really were I said I would be
honored to come for that and so I got my
charts out and told them what I believed
you know six thousand years ago God made
everything 4,400 years ago big flood and
then I told him what they believe you
know 20 billion years ago Big Bang 4.6
million years on earth cooled down
etcetera etcetera and we all came from
soup one professor said
joven he said there are two to three
hundred varieties of dogs in the world
today do you mean to tell me that all
those dogs came from two dogs on Noah's
Ark you expect me to believe that I said
sir would you look at what you're
teaching your students you're teaching
your students that all the dogs in the
world came from a rock
now
I spoke of one University and afterwards
this lady came up to me and boy she was
angry she said tonight you said we
believe we came from Iraq we do not
believe that I said ma'am calm down
you're gonna blow a gasket here man I
said ma'am do you believe in evolution
she said yes I do I'm a professor here
at the University I said okay then where
did we come from
she said we came from a macromolecule I
said in where did that come from
she said from the oceans from the
prebiotic soup I said in where did that
come from
she said well it rained on the rocks
from millions of years it was so cool
you can see we're slowly dawning on her
I do believe if I come from a rock don't
I yeah you certainly do okay and you so
that's what their theory teaches 20
million years ago a big bang count
cosmic chemical and stellar evolution
would have to take place in the first
you know X number of billion years and
then we'd have to have organic evolution
somewhere some how long ago and far away
life had to start from nonliving
material this has been proven wrong for
years francisco redi Louie Pasteur come
on you guys are in the 14th century if
you believe that and then you'd have to
have Mac revolution what animal changes
to a different kind of animal and
finally the only one that is scientific
is what we call micro or simply
variations that one is science the first
five are religious going just from micro
to macro would take a giant leap of
faith and logic okay that's a fantasy
based upon imagination you got the other
four stages too by the way this textbook
says evolution has changed over time now
watch how they change the definition on
the kids evolution in other words there
is no doubt that living things have
changed over time oh now they jump down
to living things what happened to the
first floor you're just gonna skip them
and assume that they're part of science
they really much want this very much
want to skip them then they say
evolution can be defined as a change in
species over time well now they're down
to what I believe in I believe species
can change but I believe the changes are
limited see this is a lie folks that's
not really what they mean by evolution
they want to suck the kids into
believing in evolution by showing them
an example of a little variation and
then say see that proves the whole
theory oh it does not doesn't prove a
thing it proves dogs produce dogs
sometimes big sometimes a little bit
dogs all the evidence they give for
evolution has been proven wrong years
ago here's a textbook evidence from
fossils that's sheer baloney no fossil
counts you don't know that that bone had
any kids try that in a court of law on a
freshman lawsuit
they'll tear you apart on that one okay
evidence from structure molecular
biology evidence from development
everything they do is been proven wrong
there's no scientific evidence to
support this theory except things that
have been proven wrong years ago now if
real evidence for the theory exists and
please show me but don't keep spreading
lies as if you've got some evidence for
your theory there isn't any evolutions
based on two faulty assumptions number
one they assume mutations will make
something new and better that's never
been observed secondly they assume
natural selection makes it survive see
an order for evolution to work one
animal has to evolve a little better
than the rest now what must happen to
the rest of them to make this work they
gotta die
evolutions a religion of death not a
religion of life according to evolution
death brought man into the world
according to the Bible man brought death
into the world totally opposite
somebody's wrong folks seriously wrong
this textbook talks about mutations and
it says mutations are the original
source of variation in populations I
agree probably all the roses in the
world today had a common ancestor rose
mutations do not produce evolution
nearly all scientists agree with that
they just simply don't produce evolution
here's a mutated Bulls got five legs
there's no new information added here's
a short sheep short legged sheet that's
a mutant no new information is added he
lost some information and he's the first
one the wolf is gonna catch there's a
two-headed turtle that's mutant it's not
ninja but it's mutant okay now he's
gonna freeze first winter nobody makes a
double neck turtleneck sweater hmm okay
scrambling up letters from the word
Christmas we'll get you all sorts of
different words but you will never get
Xerox out of Christmas the letters
aren't available and scrambling up an
existing gene code which is what a
mutation does does not give you some new
improved information it doesn't do it
this textbook shows the kids a four wing
fly and it says normal fruit flies have
two wings this mutant has four and by
the way it cannot fly it says this rare
mutation like most mutations is harmful
now watch this beneficial mutations are
the raw material for natural selection
well excuse me why didn't they show us a
beneficial mutation why did they show us
a bad one and tell us about the good
ones
show me a good one there's never been
one one professor said oh there's a good
mutation people in Africa they get
sickle cell anemia cannot get malaria I
saw that's brilliant sir that's like
saying if you cut off your legs you
can't get athlete's foot you know that's
just brilliant they tell the kids
evolution and natural selection go
together this one says evolution natural
selection causes evolution oh come on
natural selection selects it doesn't
create anything
there's the world's smallest horse
pretty tiny useless doesn't bark I mean
what good is it you know natural
selection does not create how people got
this crazy idea that natural selection
is a creative force I don't know but
it's not it doesn't create a thing it
just simply selects it's a quality
control and if we had time we'd get a
lot more that quality control does not
change the car to an airplane if you
select all the bad cars okay everything
in nature was designed and if you don't
like that I'm sorry but there is a
designer and we're gonna all stand
before him one of these days maybe
pretty soon thank you so much
[Applause]
before I turn to genetics I want to make
a few comments on what we've just heard
here and the level of honesty of the
person making these comments because
this is someone who feels free to call
other people liars and to use the word
lie about a whole set of people and a
whole set of activities yet he's has
some vulnerability on exactly that
subject let's just deal with trivia
first of all symbiosis requires
simultaneous creation that's nonsense
we have many numerous studies of
symbiosis beginning and in some cases
symbiosis breaking down and you don't
have to imagine
simultaneously everything's in place in
order to get it to evolve
that's an elementary error that's been
around in some forms for over a hundred
years
he claims that evolutionary theory is
not science but is religion because
science he says is derived from
observation and study and since you
can't actually observe a fossil change
into a different fossil then therefore
your discussions on what you assume
happened is religious that's nonsense
again
there are all kinds of observations you
make and studies you make that lead to
inferences and conclusions from which
you can derive a given result so that's
fatuous that we're talking about
opposing religious schools now regarding
his infatuation with a terminal liar I
urge on you two websites that you can go
to if you want a deeper knowledge of
this one is WW talk origins org and
that'll deal with very detailed
reputations of the bizarre story he's
peddling about how this universe came
about there is one that may appeal to
some of you in this audience even more
it's called answer
in Genesis org it is an explicitly
Christian website but it has a
subsection called arguments creationists
should not use and this is devoted to
arguments that this character has used
in the past and that are recognized as
being dishonest in content and almost
certainly dishonest in intent including
various kinds of lies he's told about
Darwin's deathbed conversion about
thomas henry huxley talking about free
sex a basking shark found off of japan
really being a plesiosaur and so forth
and so on
I don't have the time to deal with this
kind of trivia but I urge you if you've
got an interest in a slightly more
mature Christian creationist approach to
check Answers in Genesis or if you're
interested in the evidence more broadly
to check talk origins cord has been
proven fraudulent everything has been
disproven nonsense
this is spontaneous generation he claims
again nonsense spontaneous generation
was a notion that you could get a frog
appearing out of nowhere mutations never
make things better now that's a lie we
have many examples of mutations that are
beneficial including for that matter the
mutation that in here is I guess form
that's where you have one of them and
you don't have the other provides you
with protection from malaria a mutation
that is disproportionately present in
African American people derived from an
area that was high in malaria and then
he repeats an old old canard natural
selection does not create it only
destroys it only selects natural
selection is a continual Selective
process but it moves the frequency
distribution of genes beyond the
distribution that existed when it
started and it
create brand new creations relatively
quickly that have never existed before
it's elementary now let me go back to
talking about genetics for a second
because this is a second kind of another
kind of problem you get into when you
just invent something out of whole cloth
and imagine that it's gonna fly if
you've got an ark full of two of each
kind and only maybe ten human beings we
know for sure they're gonna have to
practice inbreeding for a number of
generations because you only got two
individuals let's hope it's male and
female the offspring have got to breed
among themselves the grandchildren have
got to breathe among themselves the
great-grand offspring have got to
breathe among themselves because there
ain't any other individuals around we
know and it's an elementary calculation
that takes about seven generations to
wipe out all genetic variability now
this level of inbreeding imposed on all
organic or organisms has destroyed its
destructive in the way he moans and
groans about natural selection it
destroys genetic variability and it
destroys knowledge now 6,000 years ago
this all happened according to him
that's about 200 generations since then
we have plenty of good observations
through study that in humans you accrue
roughly a new mutation per generation so
each of you in here can be happy that
you're a mutant to some fair probability
now if you allow 200 generations then we
can allow the accumulation of 200 new
mutations during that period of time
that would lead to 40,000 of your genes
only 200 of them would show variability
due to a new mutation in fact out of our
40,000 genes 4,000 of
show genetic variability how can you
generate this consistent with his
hypothesis well again you'd have to
invent some ad hoc hypothesis you'd have
to say well for reasons unknown to us
and without any evidence for it
whatsoever and inconsistent with
everything we know about current life
there was our reign of mutations that
struck not just humans but struck all
other creatures as well and then you
think oh well I've gotten myself out of
that yes I've got to imagine another
absurdity but fine I'm out of the
immediate mind but it ain't that easy
because if the individuals are accruing
mutations rapidly over this short period
of time they all trace back to the
ancestral group 6,000 years ago so as we
like to say everything comes back as
spokes on a wheel instead of trees where
some individuals are more related to
others and some groups are more related
to others some share more variance with
some individuals than others if you
apply this to well there's a worse
problem still which I'll go over in two
minutes time I don't want to introduce
too much science into this revival
meeting but I want to introduce a little
bit the genetic the genetic code is
redundant that is there are some codes
that code for the same amino acids so
you can get a mutation from one code
there to the other still produces the
same protein still the identical same
individual we we don't think natural
selection acts on those genes or acts
extremely weakly because it produces the
same individual
now those change over time due to random
processes and these have been studied in
some depth in the lab and they fit logic
and they start to devolve diverge from
each other solely because of random
factors some individuals breathe some
don't and so some variants which are
coding for the same thing become more
frequent and others less frequent
they've all by a random walk well the
interesting thing about random walks is
that they tell time because
the longer the time for the walk the
further apart to originally identical
molecules are going to become at these
synonymous sites now two things can be
concluded from a world of data on these
synonymous sites first of all they
provide a congruent system of dating
which is congruent with the strata and
the phylogeny that's a very curious fact
that didn't get explained by his fantasy
about sorting by size during the flood
how is it that individuals that are
further down show greater divergence due
to random walk at these synonymous sites
and the second thing that's interesting
about these data is if you are given an
anchor point that is one point in time
in the past whose actual time you know
not relative time but like it's you
dated from the methods I was telling you
g illogical clocks you say it's 200
million years then you can use all of
the data on synonymous sites since then
to give exact times to the splits of
other species and you can check them
both against the geological record and
against the timing and once again it's
congruent I'm thinking of forming an
organization called race for Jesus
that's right for Jesus study or
understand I'm willing to make a
fraudulent challenge my quarter-million
dollar challenge I'm willing to make
just flat assertions about what's known
or what is it known in a vast scientific
enterprise that's occupied the serious
attention of serious people over
hundreds of thousands of them up to a
million scientists working on this over
the years and I hope mr. Hoeven will be
honorary president of the organization
that maybe I can find a role in it for
mr. Guarnieri as well I just want to end
by saying that one of the most
disturbing aspects of this and had a
sense of the orientation of many of you
is that I regard the religion that's
being pushed as being almost as bad as
the anti science I think he's giving you
a double bad deal he ain't giving you no
science and he's misrepresenting that
and the religion he's selling you to me
is infantile it's arrogant and
blasphemous to tell God how creation
occurred how God created this earth
[Applause]
and reducing God to an anthropocentric
midget that the the organism that
created this beautiful universe is just
this trivial creature running things for
the benefit of humans and a particular
group of humans right now I think it's
pathetic jesus warned against those who
would come in his name as false prophets
who would who would come crying in his
name and he and he said beware of them
judge them by their fruits he said and
what are the fruits of this man's work
misrepresentation lies and an absurd
fantasy of a flood based on a hellish
vision of what the creator is really
like thank you
[Applause]
all right thank you sir
well I stick by my guns I'll try to
answer as many questions to the Canada
moment but the evidence that is used to
support the evolution theory is indeed
lies and has been proven wrong for
example your textbook will tell you that
the appendix is vestigial you don't need
it anymore that's alive and proven wrong
years ago the appendix is part of your
immune system if your appendix is taken
out you can still live there's no
question about that
you can live without both your legs and
both your arms and both your eyes also
it doesn't prove you don't need it the
appendix look at the wrong remote here's
the problem the appendix is part of the
immune system
anybody studies biology or anatomy
should understand that say there we go
you take your appendix out you got a
better chance of getting quite a few
diseases sometimes that's the best
option but the appendix is not vestigial
that should not be used as evidence for
evolution this textbook says the whale
has a vestigial pelvis many organisms
retain traces of their evolutionary
history for example the whale retains
pelvic and leg bones as useless vestiges
the National Center for Science
education in Berkeley as little
storefront building says that Bosse
evolved a blowhole this is how whales
evolved according to the National Center
who's whose whole purpose is to keep
creation out of schools to defend the
teaching of evolution against sectarian
attack this was started by Andrew
Carnegie with a grant because he loved
the evolution theory and gave a bunch of
money to support the evolution theory in
schools this textbook again says the
whale has a pelvis right here the whales
have a pelvis vestigial pelvis that
served no purpose whales have hind limb
bones that have no function this
textbook says just imagine whales
walking around it's true these are the
bones they're talking about right there
these little bones are supposed to let
us imagine that the whale used to walk
around now this one says the whale
hasn't barrel pelvis has no apparent
function the whales pelvis is evidence
of its evolution from four-legged land
dwelling
this is simply a lie those bones are
part of the whales reproductive system
the male and female bones have whales
have different bones their whales are
pretty big and that's part of the
reproductive system it has nothing to do
with walking on land and never did okay
here's a 15 and a half foot Python
snakeskin I have in my museum you can
see if you look down near the anterior
and it has little tiny claws right there
one here and one here attached to a
little tiny bone that goes up inside the
snake's body now the textbook says
rudimentary hind legs of a python snake
are supposed to be evidence for
evolution those are not rudimentary hind
legs those are used in mating the snake
can't talk he can't say scoot over honey
and it didn't have any arms okay this
has nothing to do with the snake walking
on land they're so desperate for
evidence for evolution that this becomes
evidence for evolution and it's not
don't tell that to the kids
this one says humans have a tailbone
that is of no apparent use and this is
part of the evidence for evolution the
vestigial tail bone in humans is
homologous to the functional tail in
other primates with us vestigial
structures can be viewed as evidence for
evolution
I tell people look if you think the
tailbone is vestigial I will pay to have
yours removed there are nine little
muscles that attach to the tail bone
without which you cannot perform some
valuable functions I won't tell you what
they all are but trust me you need that
tail bone this guy says the coccyx at
the small bone at the human end of human
vertebral column it has no present
function and it's thought to be
remainder bones at once occupied this
long tail of a tree living ancestor that
is simply a lie folks it is not true why
they why how the kids teach their
teachers to teach that stuff I don't
know let me get to a few of the what
happened here oh here we go a few of the
rebuttal thing here let's see Oh went
too far here we go no wrong one there
some points me he said evolution is
supported by an overwhelming number of
scientists the majority opinion means
nothing in any argument okay
the majority pin you can think the
world's flat and can think that you know
if you take your blood how'd you get
better in the majority for 2,000 years
thought big rocks fall faster than other
rocks and it's not true they thought the
planets go around the earth and that's
not true fossils are the key subject
does a huge number of fossils have been
found I agree but none proving evolution
fossils exist in the press
you can put an interpretation on them if
you want which is what happens with the
evolution theory 99% of the species are
extinct I don't know if that figures
correct or not that depends on how you
want look at it but still that's the
opposite of evolution extinction is the
opposite of what you need you need lots
of new ones coming on they're not
organized by the way clearly like as we
see later similar simpler creatures are
lower in the fossil record that's simply
not true
all sorts of animals are found in all
sorts of layers okay
there's quite a mixing of the fossil
record carbon dating is good for 50,000
years carbon dating is fatally flawed we
cover that for an hour on video number
seven he said some of the people in
Darwin's time said there were 20
separate creations Darwin did indeed
properly argue against a false teaching
that was going around in his day I don't
teach that this is a straw man okay I
don't know any chrétien at creation is
today that teach that there were some
people in Darwin's time who said if
there are 20 kinds of birds then God
must have made twenty kinds of birds
twenty kinds of finches or fourteen
whatever it was Darwin was correct to
refute try to refute that particular
false teaching but nobody today's talk
nobody's taught that for over a hundred
years so to bring this up now is a straw
man okay it's not being taught I don't I
never have taught that didn't know
allowed no he said no I did not allow
dinosaurs in the ark he discriminated
against him that's not true
I said earlier no it did have dinosaurs
on the ark I believe it took reptiles
dinosaur means terrible lizards what the
word means how much rain to cover the
world to take it 11 inches per hour this
is another straw man argument he's
assuming that all the rain comes from
that all the water comes from rain
number one the Bible doesn't say that it
says the Fountains of the deep broke
open most of the water came from inside
the earth secondly you don't have to
cover Mount Everest Mount Everest wasn't
there Bible says in Psalm 104 after the
flood the mountains arose the valley
sank down in the water rushed off I
don't know how much rain there was but
it didn't have to get it since he set up
a whole straw man and say well take 11
inches per hour and that would produce
x-number thousand calories and all that
kind of stuff the two to six thousand
degrees and would cook everything this
is setting up a straw man and it's
hacking it I don't know anybody that
says that and in the creationist
viewpoint most of the water came from
inside when the Fountains of the deep
broke open and that's why we have all
the fault lines today the earth is
busted up into plates
he said he's looked at fossil footprints
that are three-and-a-half million years
old they're like ours but they're
smaller well if you find put footprints
that are like ours
what should you conclude
human walk there may be a lot of people
studied those footprints in late Olli
and said well if we didn't know they
were so old we think we think a human
walked here one professor studied he
studied 70 people that go barefoot all
their life in some village out in Africa
someplace they never wear shoes ever and
he said their footprints that they make
are exactly like the ones in late Olli
okay well you found some footprints
fossilized in the ash they're assuming
they're three and a half million years
old that's baloney they're not three and
a half million years old nothing is he
said marsupial creatures are found in
Australia I agree marsupials tend to be
less aggressive I've been to Australia
you can walk up to the koalas and you
know pick them up and they're cuddling
to some extent I think after the flood
was over when the animals got off the
ark the less aggressive ones would
continually be driven to the fringe by
the more aggressive ones and then as the
water slowly came up as the ice caps
melted I believe the ice caps probably
lasted 200 years after the flood if the
if there was ice caps clear down to
Kansas City Missouri the oceans would be
lower by a few hundred feet and now you
can actually walk any place in the world
their underwater land bridges everywhere
between allies between Australia and
Vietnam the waters 50 or 60 feet deep
between Russia and Alaska the water 60
feet deep the English Channel the
deepest point in English channels 150
feet from here to that back wall I mean
it's not like we look at the ocean say
wow it's deep you know it's blue it must
be deep now there's a lot of real
shallow parts so I think by just having
larger ice caps during the LaFell flood
and after the flood there would be lower
ocean levels connecting all the
continents the Kangaroos had probably a
couple hundred years to walk or migrate
to Australia and it just happened as the
ice was melting back in the water's
rising they ended up trapped that's a
much more logical explanation than to
say kangaroos came from a rock 4.6
billion years ago he said he wants to
replace a coherent logical story
evolution is not coherent nor logical
there's no evidence for it whatsoever
based on millions of pieces of evidence
I would like to see the best evidence
anybody has just show me the best one
anybody knows of for evolution bring
that up during Q&A; please level of
honesty I yes I think if somebody uses
information that's been proven wrong
years ago they're liars Ernst Haeckel
said that the embryo growing in the
mother has gill slits that was proven
wrong in 1870 for anybody that knows
their biology knows that
embryos do not have gill slits so don't
tell people they do they're lying to
tell them they do symbiosis can't evolve
well you can dream about that depends on
I guess how intense of a level of
symbiosis you want evolutions our
religion inferences and conclusions
drawn from fossils again fossils don't
count Answers in Genesis I am good
friends with Ken Ham I love his ministry
I sell his books I linked his site he
doesn't like me for some reason that's
fine the NA he said I use arguments that
are dishonest for instance Darwin's
deathbed conversion I have never used
that I defy anybody to show me anytime
in my seminar where I've used that the
Answers in Genesis is correct that
argument should not be used his wife
darwin's wife apparently made up the
whole story about him converting on his
deathbed the story is not true and I
don't use that as far as Huxley and his
moral so let me show you what Huxley
said since I get accused all the time of
hang on
that's Huxley said and now it is correct
that I had the wrong Huxley I said
Thomas Huxley it was actually his
grandson grandson Julian Huxley said I
suppose the reason why we left at the
Origin of Species was that the idea of
God interfered with our sexual mores he
said that on a television interview
Julian Huxley the head of UNESCO he said
the reason we like this evolution theory
is because it interfered with our sexual
mores we don't want God telling us thou
shalt not commit adultery
professor ruse Michael ruse University
of Guelph said evolution is promoted by
its practitioners as more than mere
science evolution is promulgated as an
ideology a secular religion a
full-fledged alternative to Christianity
and with meaning and morality I am an
ardent evolutionist and an ex Christian
but I must admit then this is but one
complaint and mr. Gacy's but wanted one
of many to make it the illiterate are
absolutely right evolution is a religion
this was true of evolution in the
beginning and it's true of evolution
still today Arthur Keith who wrote the
foreword to Darwin's 100 year
anniversary book anniversary publication
said evolution is unproved and
unprovable we believe it because the
only alternative is special creation and
that is unthinkable professor Louis
manure said evolution is a fairy tale
for grown-ups
nothing in the progress of science it is
useless Malcolm Muggeridge said I'm
convinced the theory of evolution will
be one of the great jokes in the history
books of the future evolution is a dying
religion and all religions die hard I
mean when they pit with their burn
people at the stake for daring to
suggest the earth was not the center of
the solar system and as evolution slowly
dies in our culture you're gonna see
real vehement attacks I mean people get
fired from universities like this for
daring to question evolution it's a
dying religion folks you ought to get
off the bandwagon okay evolution
scientists go about claiming evolution
is a fact of life a great con man the
story they are telling is the greatest
hoax ever and explaining evolution we do
not have one iota a fact Fred Hoyle
famous astronomer from Europe so the
only way life could have come into
existence is because some super
intelligence haven't created it well we
could talk for hours on this one let me
get back to where we were if we got few
seconds left here okay
let's see
and get to where we were
all evidence is proven wrong I stick by
my guns there are no beneficial
mutations but it looks to me like he
wants it both ways here he wants to say
seven generations of inbreeding will
wipe out the fair variability and then
turns it around and says there's not
enough time to get all these variations
we have I think he's walking out of both
sides of his mouth there oh I cover
let's see I did not get into some levels
of some other some other examples of
lies in the textbooks that are used to
support the evolution theory how much
time textbooks tell the kids that the
horse evolve from a four toad horse okay
this biology book admits this much
included much repeated gradual evolution
of the modern horse has not held up to
close examination fifty years ago Gigi
Simpson a very famous brand named
evolutionist said the evolution of the
horse family was unintentionally
falsified it's been proven for 50 years
the horse story that's in your textbooks
is not true but they're still teaching
it Simpson said the uniform continuous
transformation of the horse series
basically did never happen in nature but
they say they have evidence this is one
of the best evidence is used for
evolution Darwin considered this the
best piece of evidence for his theory he
said the embryo growing into human his
gills this textbook says the presence of
fish like structures and embryos of
different species shows that these
animals have evolved from fish and share
the basic pattern of fish development
they want you to think that's a gills
like a fish that's simply a live folks
that's been proven wrong 128 years ago
those are not gills those little folds
of skin develop into bones in the ear
and glands in the throat they never have
anything to do with breathing I've seen
people that have five or six chins and
they can't breathe through any of them
but to top one okay this is simply a lie
hey go read Darwin's book the year after
it came out when I was translated to
German and Haeckel said wow what a great
theory this gets rid of God if only we
had some evidence for this theory and
Ernst Haeckel an embryology professor at
the University of Jena in Germany lied
he took a drawing of a dog in a human
and he faked he lied he changed him he
made him look alike here are the actual
drawings these are his fake drawings he
changed all sorts of things to make him
look alike
Haeckel made giant charts of his fake
drawings and traveled all over Germany
and held seminars on why everybody
should believe in evolution actually
here are Heinkels drawings compared to
actual photographs taken a couple years
ago he lied my point is this is still
being used in textbooks today as
evidence for evolution I care I think
some other people care to get the lies
out of our books
[Applause]
my point is if you have some evidence
for evolution then show me but don't lie
to the kids don't tell them the embryo
officer if you can keep it in line
please okay I don't want to have to you
waste it my waste my time I will be glad
to take questions okay but grow up a
little bit wait your turn okay this is
simply a lie but it's used in textbooks
all over the world it was proven wrong
in 1874 here it is in a 94 textbook here
another 94 textbook here Tim Berra still
teaching it Ken Miller still teaching it
in a 1998 textbook I could talk for
hours I debated Ken Miller is a tooth or
98 textbook used in Pensacola Florida
still teaching the same line this one
shows says they suggest evolution from a
common ancestor because of the presence
of gills this is simply not true
here's a 2001 textbook used for junior
high saying that similarities provide
evidence that these three animals
evolved from a common ancestor now look
that's not true they don't provide such
evidence but the books teach this over
and over and over it's in books I've
been to 30 countries in all 49 states
it's in books all over the world folks
they're teaching the same thing they're
saying it's not a human yet it's a human
at conception every doctor knows that
they teach it doesn't have gill slits
this is baloney so if you have evidence
for evolution show me but don't lie to
these kids come on we can go for hours
and hours on lies in the textbook all I
want is very simple get the lies out of
the books then the books will be fine
there's a lot of good science in the
books we're not against science but
we're against supporting a lousy theory
with false ideas that's all let's just
teach the truth teach science to the
kids and I think you'll find evolution
I'll have to slowly slip through the
cracks and that's what they're really
worried about thank you so much
[Applause]
[Applause]
okay we have a question answer time now
and dr. Trevor is going to receive the
first question he's gonna have about two
minutes we're not gonna hold him real
tight to that but we're about two
minutes to answer the question so the
finished finished responding or if yours
fine sooner that's fine and then dr.
ovens now an opportunity to comment on
that and then we'll go back and forth
and for approximately a half hour for
the question and answer period so I hope
your question gets in but obviously we
couldn't get all the questions there
must be a hundred questions there so all
right I'm gonna get this microphone our
first question will be for dr. Travis
dr. Cheevers how would you explain
fossilized clams on top of Mount Everest
oh I see okay now it's working question
is how would I explain fossilized plants
on Mount Everest and assuming there are
fossilized plants on Mount Everest I
wouldn't have any great difficulty
what's that what are those clamps what
do I say yeah what did I say it's clams
we're talking about okay so that we're
all on the same page the question has to
do with fossilized clams not plants on
Mount Everest and I say assuming that
such exists then I'd have to understand
the geological history of the mountain
if you're a recent creationist it all
happens 6,000 years ago and everything
else is a lie then mountains haven't
changed an awful lot except for this
enormous scouring of water that took
place in this deluge unless you believe
in other fantasy that the water was
hidden away inside and popped out or
another fantasy of dr. Hogan's that it
all came in a meteor with water until it
was shown that that would be vaporized
it's well known that mounties rise
through the tectonic forces that are
generated by tectonic plates so I'll
just switch it I don't know mine ever
has never been there but I have spent a
lot of time in Jamaica and it is well
known that the mountain in Jamaica which
is 7600 feet was came up from the ocean
on my own property that's about 2,000
feet up not on a mountainside you can
find limestone which of course is is
being generated by living creatures in
coral reefs and within the limestone you
can find clams and other kinds of
creatures and in some cases you can find
ones that don't exist now in fact if you
study the whole structure of the area I
live in you see repeated areas of
limestone just as you would expect if
the earth was rising and as it first
comes above the water you've got these
coral reefs forming and then as it
continues to rise as coral reefs are
both water they dry out and become
limestone okay
here's a public school textbook saying
climbers reaching the top of Mount
Everest plant their victory flags over
the remains of animals that once lived
in the sea it's a simple fact that the
top three thousand feet of Mount Everest
is indeed full of sedimentary rock
loaded with sea shells here's an article
from the paper last year two years ago
paleontologists whatever his name is
here rests on a giant fossil Easter
found in Peru more than 500 giant fossil
Easter's were found two miles above sea
level
some of which are 11 and a half feet
wide and 661 pounds well interesting
these oysters are in the closed position
petrified clams in the closed position
are found all over the world including
the top Mount Everest now when a clam
dies it opens you can walk along the
beach and find a billion seashells you
hardly ever find a matched pair and you
don't find them closed if they're dead
they open the muscle relaxants it's just
a natural response so I think the best
explanation of petrified clams and
sometimes they're found up to ten feet
thick solid petrified clams jammed in
there closed and petrified to me it's
not a problem the flood would have
underwater to what are called turbidity
currents mudslides under water move
incredibly fast there was one turbidity
current that cut the transatlantic cable
years ago they said we've had to move 70
miles an hour underwater the mud flow I
think during the flood in the days of
Noah you would get incredible turbidity
currents that would bury beds of clams
and when they wake up dead they can't
open and so they end up getting
petrified and then the Bible says in
Psalm 104 the mountains arose the valley
sink down and the petrified clams on top
my nervous are absolutely no problem for
my worldview
next question is for Kent Hovind dr.
Kent Holden please explain the
assumptions in carbon-14 dating I have
about so who knows five or six or seven
thousand slides in my presentation so it
really helped if asked the questions in
the same order that I have the same in
the answers you know carbon dating is
based on quite a few obvious assumptions
I'll give you a quick analogy I cover
this for an hour on video number seven
if you want to get to a good detail if I
ask you to fill a barrel with water but
I had drilled holes in the barrel while
you're filling it it's leaking at some
point you're gonna reach a stage called
equilibrium you can't fill it past that
point unless you speed up the intake or
cut down the outgo the atmosphere is
receiving carbon-14 it's actually being
manufactured by radiation striking
nitrogen and it's turning it into
carbon-14 which is a radioactive isotope
unstable last 5730 years according to
most scientists well at some point the
Earth's atmosphere would have to reach
equilibrium if if you just created a
brand new planet Earth stuck it out
there who forgot it spinning around the
Sun Willard Libby did quite a bit of
study on this he invented carbon dating
and they said it would take about 30,000
years for the atmosphere to reach
equilibrium in other words it's created
being created and being destroyed
simultaneously so within thirty thousand
years the atmosphere would equalize then
Willard Libby said well we know the
earth is millions years old mistake
number one therefore we can ignore the
equilibrium problem mistake number two
first atmosphere has still not reached
equilibrium radiocarbon is forming
twenty eight to thirty seven percent
faster than it's decaying
carbon dating is an excellent proof the
earth is less than thirty thousand years
old probably much less than thirty
thousand years old when you go to date
animals to test their age with carbon
dating you get really wild numbers I
don't have time to go through all the
other assumptions based on like the rate
of burn etc but I could just give you a
few examples showing you that it doesn't
work
living mollusk shells carbon dated 2300
years old
freshly calcio carbonated thirteen
hundred years old shells from living
snails carbon dated twenty seven
thousand years old this guy said if a
carbon date supports our theories who
put it in the main text if it does not
entirely contradict and we put it in a
footnote if it's completely out of date
we just drop it
here's those guys no matter how useful
it is the radiocarbon method is still
not capable of yielding accurate
reliable results there are gross
discrepancies their chronology is uneven
in relative and the accepted dates are
actually selected dates though blessed
thing is nothing but 13th century
alchemy it all depends upon which funny
paper you read here's one part of a
mammoth 29,000 years old another parts
44,000 same animal that's a slow birth
where we could talk here a long time
geologic column ok the lower leg of a
mammoth dated 15,000 years old the skin
was 21,000 it just doesn't work I'm
sorry it doesn't work thank you
[Applause]
dr. triggers yes I'll just simply urge
you we're interested in the latest set
of lies from a liar for Jesus go to WWE
arjan's org and that'll give you
references also to the literature that
he's very selectively and in some cases
grossly inaccurately referring to I
don't have any more to say about that
[Applause]
question for dr. triggers as a scientist
myself I would like to hear evolutions
explanation for trees that stick
vertically up through many cemetery
layers that evolution says were
deposited over millions of years but I'm
honest that's all I got to say I don't
know the phenomena he's referring to all
right I do understand the phenomena and
I'm honest - and I resent being called a
liar tonight I'd like you to be specific
if you have another lie give me one at a
time and I'll handle
when you say no one has found a single
beneficial mutation you're a liar when
you say someone with a beneficial
mutation
[Applause]
we will get back to that if time permits
I would like to beneficial mutation the
textbooks will teach the kids that the
layers of strata are different ages this
is taught uniformly all over the world
that the layers are different ages and
yet all over the world in Germany France
British Isles Nova Scotia California and
several eastern states petrified trees
are found in the vertical position
running through multiple rock layers
Yellowstone has 27 consecutive layers of
these trees at specimen ridge standing
trees in the petrified petrified trees
in the standing position running through
multiple rock layers is proof positive
the layers are not millions of years
different in age in central Alabama
there's a large coal field right there
you can talk to dr. McDonald who's an a
geologist who works there in that coal
field and he will show you
dozens of petrified trees that were
found standing up running through
multiple rock layers the kids have been
taught for years that the Blue Creek and
the Mary leaf formation are different
ages and yet when you put all the
fossils together you get sample abcdefg
you can prove positively those layers
formed quickly petrified trees 30 feet
tall found in Cookeville Tennessee
standing up joggins Nova Scotia is
famous for its petrified trees in the
vertical position they're called poly
strata fossils why students are taught
why people are allowed to teach that
each of those rock strata are a
different age I don't know but they are
not it is not common sense sometimes the
trees are upside down running through
many rock layers they are not little
rock layers are not different ages but
the whole theory of evolution rests on
the assumption that the geologic column
is accurate and that was proven that was
developed by Charles Lyell and others
back in the 1830s way before there ever
was a carbon dating argon dating a
rubidium strontium bading or any other
thing else okay okay next
[Applause]
next question is for dr. Hoeven the
e-beam on this is a bird-like dinosaur
that supposedly had feathers how do you
discount this as traditional
transitional proof for evolution from
reptiles to birds okay the question the
dinosaurs become Birds Bible says God
made the foul on day five he made the
reptiles on day six evolution theory is
exactly the opposite reptiles came first
and then birds
this guy says scientists or a lot of
dinosaurs are alive as Birds it's absurd
99 and National or USA Today published
an article about the missing link was
discovered National Geographic the
missing link breaking news we found the
proof revolution had a big article about
it in November 99 two months later
oops it was a fraud somebody some guy in
China made this thing and sold it to the
Americans for a lot of money proven
wrong we could go out spend a long time
on this one if you'd like on this
dinosaurs that birds the descendants of
dinosaurs all you got to do is add a few
feathers and say man it go ahead it
won't hurt too much give it a try okay
there are millions of differences Helen
fiducia is hardly one of the world's
experts on birds he believes in
evolution strongly UNC Chapel Hill
he said paleontologists tried to turn
archeopteryx into an Earthbound
feathered dinosaur but it's not it's a
bird it's a perching bird Archaeopteryx
had claws on its wings and they say
that's a missing link we don't have time
to cover all this today but there's an
awful lot of evidence that the one you
mentioned here I think I have stuff on
that one too I have most of the things
in here are cap tricks and none of these
can be missing links fully formed birds
are found in rock layers dated by the
evolutionists at a hundred thirty
million years old how could they evolved
from dinosaurs dinosaurs lived and died
up according to their theory 65 million
years ago 140 million year old birds
found much older than Archaeopteryx
fossil remains of a bird 140 to 170
million years old so it could not
possibly be a descendant fiducia says
I'm sorry T Oh times 96 model says there
are plenty of other reasons to refute
the dinosaur bird connection says
fiducia how do you derive birds from
heavy earthbound bipedal reptile that
has a deep body a heavy balancing tail
in foreshortened limbs he said
biophysically it's impossible
lungs are totally different modern birds
are found in layers lower than and with
the dinosaurs scales and feathers
attached differently to the body they
come from different genes on the
chromosomes birds have a four chambered
heart most reptiles have three Birds Lea
calcium covered egg reptiles lay
generally a leather egg there simply is
no fossil evidence of how a reptile
change to a bird now if you want to
believe that you just enjoy yourself but
that's a religion keep it out of our
schools please question for dr. Hogan
the 24-hour day is based on the Earth's
rotation
Earth's orbit around the Sun soaked in
the first couple of days be 24 hours if
the Sun the Moon were created until the
fourth day good question I think the
Bible says that God is light and it says
he made light first and our day starts
at midnight when the sun's not even out
one spin of the earth is a day on earth
in relation to anything you could have a
day you could have the earth spinning in
relation to anything you know it's bad
we happen to start at midnight like I
said so later in Exodus chapter 20 God
told his people that I want you to honor
the Sabbath because in six days the Lord
made heaven and earth and same thing in
Exodus 31 here we have clear examples
where God lumped all six days together
as if they're the same
the Sun wasn't there till day three our
day for I understand but there was light
before that and the earth apparently was
spinning before that in relation to that
light that would be a real minor
question or problem compared to the
evolutionist problem that we all came
from a rock 4.6 billion years ago in my
opinion
[Applause]
I'll say two things the the the answer
that question is too trivial to go into
it's a good question we measure a day a
certain way days didn't appear in that
form till four days into this story the
story is a metaphor it's not a hey they
were really 24 hours and you can take it
to the bank if that kind of
argumentation satisfies you that oh well
there was light and somehow the earth
was spinning even before it was created
to spin fine I don't have anything to
say about it I just want to go back one
step I do not believe that mr. Hogan
knows what a mutation is because he's
now shifted his criterion now a mutation
is something that's that suddenly and
one jump takes you from this species to
a brand new species that's why he's got
to have individuals with two mutations
matching because that's the only way mr.
Hoban can imagine
2news species arriving just like
everything has to happen at an instant
in creation just like the whole parent
illogical record has to be wrought in a
few months of this horrendous flood he's
describing so his only image his
blinkered image of how you can get a new
species from another species is a single
event in a single generation I mean
there are a whole bunch of biology
courses which I'm happy to know your
children will be taking that looks
explain to him explain to him how that
works I think that was my response to
him this make this the last question for
dr. Cheevers yes sir
explain the evolution of a feather
explained the evolution of a feather
from the scales of reptiles how am I
supposed to explain the evolution of a
feather well it is uncertain how
feathers evolved or what their initial
function was it was initially believed
they evolved for flight it later seemed
more logical and there was again some
fossil evidence that was consistent with
it that they may have evolved for
thermoregulation and later achieved a
role in flight they're believed to have
evolved from scales of a reptile and I'm
not a bird anatomist
and I've not spent my life concerning
myself with every single detail of every
single creature including in particular
the details as to how feathers evolved
all right
this biology book says very clearly bird
feathers evolved from the same scales
that protected the reptiles so well bird
feathers are unbelievably complex
feathers and scales are both made of the
protein keratin but that proves a common
design engineer not a common ancestor
battleships and forks are both made from
iron it doesn't prove one evolve from
the tin can that proves iron is a good
substance with which to make things okay
and the designer used keratin to create
all kinds of things 1996 Journal of
evolutionary biology vol 9 page 140 at
the morphological level feathers are
traditionally considered homologous with
reptilian scales
however in development morpho Jesus gene
structure protein shape and sequence and
filament formation and structure
feathers are different clearly feathers
provide a unique and outstanding example
of evolutionary novelty now the guy
still believes in evolution we'll try to
fix that but he says they are unique
they did not evolve from scales it's
just they're just too different if
somebody wants to believe they did
that's perfectly fine and if you go back
and listen to the tape you'll see
several times he said well we believe it
might have happened or you know could
have happened or something like that
that's fine I don't care if what you
believe it's not science it's a religion
face it admit it it's a religion if you
want to believe that great you teach
that it you're at your expense to your
kids don't teach that at my expense to
my kids
that's all thank you
[Applause]
it's turn over here this will be our
last question for dr. Hoeven if
creationists believe the universe was
created 6,000 years ago how do you
explain the galaxies and stars which are
millions and billions of light years
away I don't know that I can do that in
the time allotted I will certainly try
we cannot tell the distance to stars
beyond a few light years I'll show you
the problems with that in a hurry here
if wish we had more time I cover this in
great detail in video number seven let
me get up to or if you watch it on my
website to a long answer to this Stephen
Hawking said stars are so far away all
we see is a pinpoint of light the
biggest telescope looking at the closest
star all you see is a dot to measure the
distance to something you cannot touch
you have to use trigonometry if there
are two angles and a side or two sides
in an angle earth is 8,000 miles in
diameter which is basically a zero
compared to star distance so what
they've done to enlarge the triangle is
they look at the star in January and
look at it in June and now you have a 93
million mile radius on a circle which is
8 light minutes so a 16 light minute
diameter a year has 525,000 minutes in
it so if you had to survey or 16 inches
apart looking at a dot eight and a third
miles away that's the ratio you have
using Earth's orbit as the base looking
at one light year that makes an angle of
point zero one seven degrees to measure
one hundred light years is clearly
impossible that's like two people in
Chicago cola on my roof 16 inches apart
looking at a dot in Chicago 15 billion
years is clearly impossible - we just
simply can't measure those distances I
don't they've stars probably are
billions of light years away I don't
know nobody does this textbook says you
can measure 100 light years well I doubt
it but I'll give one hundred so we don't
know the distance to the stars they
could be billions of light years we also
have proven pretty conclusively here in
the last 20 years that the speed of
light is not a constant at Harvard
University and 99 they slowed light down
to 38 miles an hour the next year they
slowed it down to one mile an hour the
next year they brought it to a dead stop
this was done at Harvard Smithsonian and
Cambridge that's what science is
something repeatable observable not
hypothetical at Princeton meanwhile they
speeded light up to 300 times the speed
of light the speed of light has
decreased so rapidly over time that
experimental error cannot explain it
astronomer Barry Satterfield from
Australia said here's the chart showing
the decline in the speed
like we had time we talked about all
that the speed of light was apparently
exceeded by a factor of as much as a
hundred everything's documented at the
bottom of the screen and on my website
the speed of light was 10 billion times
faster at time zero
according to Big Bang Theory it's
petabyte had to be faster the speed of
light may have changed over history
study says a shocking possibility is the
speed of light might have might change
in time during the life of the universe
now 2002 august sydney australia said
the speed of the light speed of light
may not be a constant the speed of speed
limit of the cosmos is being questioned
there's a new book out called faster
than the speed of light thirdly I think
that God created made it made a mature
creation Adam and Eve were full-grown
the trees were full-grown it has to be
that way you don't want to make two
babies and put them in the Garden of
Eden and give him a package of seeds and
say here plant these quick it had to be
mature a light year is the distance it's
not a time so if a star is ten billion
light years away that's a distance
that's not a time it's 10 billion light
years that's a distance on how they miss
that the speed of light is not proven to
be consistent so I would start distance
of anything to do with the age of the
universe God could have made it you know
yesterday if he wanted I think he made a
6,000 years ago everything mature fully
for I'm fully functioning that's my
answer and how they say that on America
no no that's my final answer
[Applause]
there is no doubt that the speed of
light may have changed over cosmological
time and it would be very difficult for
us with our present understanding as I
understand it and I'm strictly an
outsider on physics and cosmology to
prove or disprove whether the speed of
light has changed over long long periods
of time that it has been increased the
speed in Princeton is an outright
fabrication you can go to this person
and get him to give you the references
and you can chase them down and see if
anybody else in this state or anywhere
else that has actual knowledge of the
scientific work believes that someone
has speeded up the speed of light by
what was it a factor 300 you said I'll
show you the reference so 300 I think
you said this will be that's what the
article said let's see all right well in
here New York Times May 30th year 2000
so take it up with mayor or
what's-his-name from New York
this is the article just as it appeared
on June 4th of year 2000
okay well young Wang yeah find find a
scientific journal and see if the
conclusion is is described in there you
know I had one thought before I came
over here and this is the end of the
question period so this will be my last
thought I figured this man probably uses
a computer he probably uses light bulbs
he probably watches the television he
probably makes use of the enormous
technological innovations that have come
from the scrupulous careful detail and
now centuries-long application of
scientific reasoning to the universe
around us if you followed his style of
approach broadly not just we want to
teach our children this and that but
took his style of approach towards
reality his assertions about the
veracity of the work of other people and
so on you wouldn't come up with a
calculator you wouldn't come up with a
ruler you wouldn't come up with nothing
like the computer that he's blessed to
be able to use thank you
dr. Trevor's had an opportunity of some
closing comments dr. Hovind some closing
comments please I certainly enjoy
science I have nothing against science
but the idea that we wouldn't have
computers if it weren't for evolution is
simply ludicrous evolution
almost don't use up man no I use that my
time here nearly all of the branches of
science were started by creationists
it's the evolutionists that came along
and like a leech began to suck the blood
out of a valuable science over the last
20 years nearly all branches of science
were started by creationists not by
evolutionists I defy you to find me one
scientific advancement because of the
theory of evolution the evolution theory
is useless it's not only useless it's
dangerous we teach the kids they're an
animal and then wonder why did he act
like an animal well duh there are these
are names of scientists who were
believers in creation so don't tell me
that we wouldn't have a computer if it
hadn't been for evolution the guy who
invented like Maxwell for instance or
Lord Kelvin and all these guys all these
guys were the shoulders that the Giants
were standing are the the people are
standing on the shoulders of giants
these are the giants they were standing
on to create a computer somebody had to
develop the transistor and had to
develop the circuitry and printed
circuitry and these guys were
creationists these guys were believers
in the Bible they thought God created
the world and it's it's man's duty to
try to see how God did it and why he did
it I love science and it isn't it's a
useless theory it doesn't help us get a
computer or go to the moon there is no
value to it whatsoever and I resent the
implication that scientists all
scientists believe in evolution because
they don't the guy who invented the MRI
is a creationist like me there are
thousands of scientists who are
creationist many are indeed afraid of
losing their job because there's a real
prejudice against those who don't
believe who don't bow down to the sacred
cow I'm sorry here you find that right
one here I'll give you some examples
here very quickly since these are
closing comments here about some
scientists who were wrong and in passed
here lots of funny examples of that dr.
Robert Gentry did incredible research on
the disposal of radioactive wastes at
Oakridge laboratories in Knoxville
Tennessee he was one of the world's
experts on Granite's he published in all
the major magazines saying look the
Granite's have these little tiny halos
in a radial polonium haloes indicating
this rock was never hot it forms too
quickly you can get his book or his
website two halos calm if you want to
get more on their rogered to har it was
a science teacher in high school in
Washington he was told he could not tell
his students about errors in the
textbooks by
hangout current science journals you
can't tell the kids there's a lie in
your textbook Kevin Haley biology
teacher Central Oregon Community College
lost his job for simply exposing errors
in the textbooks because that's a threat
to the evolutionist Baylor University
fired
William demske because he advocated
there might be an intelligent designer
that caused all this forest Mims was a
science writer for many years for many
magazines he was denied a job at
Scientific American simply because he
was a creationist Rob Levesque in
Minnesota was reassigned just because he
expressed doubt in Darwin's theory taht
teacher Dan Clark in Indiana was told by
his superintendent that he could not
introduce creationism to his class just
simply by showing current science
journal say look folks it doesn't work
this is this is the facts
Dean Kenyon at San Francisco State
University was the poster boy for
evolutionist for years he wrote all
kinds of books about evolution and then
he made the tragic mistake of getting
converted and they fired him he sued and
got his job back and now he's teaching
again but only because he was a tenured
professor if a professor stood up 20
years ago in the Soviet Union and said
kids
I don't think capital I don't think
communism works capitalism is a better
system he'd lose his job or his life we
got the same censorship in America for
somebody who dares to question the holy
sacred cow of evolution the students at
Texas Tech University offered dr. Denny
$900 if he would debate me four weeks
ago when I was there he's the one who
refuses to give recommendation letters
to his students he wouldn't take 900
dollars to debate me for two hours and
yet he'll stand in front of his class
where he's got the obvious academic and
psychological advantage but he won't
take on a creationist who can answer his
questions look I fly all over the world
I'm willing I do this at my expense the
churches sometimes take an offering I
want to help you students need to see
both sides of this issue now why so many
professors are refused refuse are
reluctant to debate this I don't know I
really appreciate this gentleman coming
to do this I think he's wrong and I'm
gonna get him converted but I'm glad he
did it
Oh
I would say I would say these are my
closing comments I'm sorry God created
this world in six days whether you like
it or not and you're gonna stand before
him and be judged by him one of these
days whether you like it or not God
created it he owns it he makes the rules
and we're gonna stand before him you
better get ready for that day
[Applause]
we gave dr. oven a few extra minutes and
I would like to do the same for dr.
Traverse
[Applause]
[Music]
can you not hear me I just I'm just
gonna comment make two comments on what
he said and then make a third comment
maybe one is this fantasy he has that
there are a huge number of scientists
out there who are scared to come out of
a closet that admit their creationist
because they're going to lose their jobs
one of the best protected institutions
in this country is tenure which says
that after you've taught for six or
eight years and you're accepted for
tenure at a university it's extremely
hard to be kicked out of the university
there's only one tenured Rutgers
professor who's been D tenured and that
was for practicing slavery alright not
for espousing creationist thoughts so
forget that fantasy the second thing
that I don't want to waste my time
illustrating here is that he makes the
assertion let's just call it a falsehood
to protect his feelings that there's not
a single useful thing that's come out of
evolutionary biology and that's just
lack of knowledge on his part or pure
bigotry or some unique combination of
the two that he's found comfortable to
live with when you are when you are
treated for a disease in a hospital when
you are given antibiotics indeed when
you are told to take them for 10 days
for reasons he's given when biological
control agents are used to control pests
of plant species and even animal species
that we depend upon all of that work is
based on evolutionary logic and a number
of those studies and advances have been
made
evolutionist so it's just another one of
these let's make the wild assertion and
see whether we can get it by this
audience the final thing I'll say is
that I've noticed a lettuce coil at
disappointing level of emotional and
intellectual development in some parts
of the audience in which it seems that
all you need to do to get straight on
whether this universe evolved or did not
is to cry for the name of Jesus and to
take and go back and read the Bible as
if every single word was printed in
stone and bypass but even here even here
there is biblical scholarship that that
this kind of organism is not going to
give you and I'll just give you one
example from Ecclesiastes remember that
I created her in the days of thy youth
when thy strength Weymouth not and you
say I shall have no use for them why
then where's them in there well the
original word was that creator the
original word was temple prostitute and
the statement was remembered now thy
temple prostitute because that was the
way you gave tithes that was one of the
ways you gave tithes in church back then
when your strength leaned it's not and
you have not then when you did not say I
have no use for anything for the temple
prostitutes so if you want to take a
kind of infantile approach toward
scripture where you're not even willing
to consider problems of translation and
real meaning well
[Applause]
hey boots both speakers have got an
outstanding job listen for both of them
[Applause]
we hope you've enjoyed watching this
debate on the topic of creation
evolution this is not just an academic
subject if the creation story is right
and God created this world then we
better do what God says and if you're
watching this tape and you're not a
Christian God loves you he wants you to
come to heaven but he hates your sin he
hates my sin he won't tolerate any sin
in heaven since he created the world and
he designed it and he owns it he makes
the rules and his rule is no sin in
heaven well we're all sinners which
means we all deserve to go to hell but
Jesus Christ got himself in the flesh
died on the cross to pay for your sins
and my sins and February 9th 1969 I
prayed and said Lord I'm a sinner would
you please forgive me and save me and on
that day I got born again into God's
family you can be born again all you
need to do is admit you're a sinner
admit that you deserve to go to hell
call upon Jesus Christ to forgive you
and save you he's the only one who can
and he wants to so badly if you'll just
ask him if you're not sure you're going
to heaven ask the Lord to save you right
now you could just pray a simple prayer
like I prayed back in 1969 I just said
Lord I'm a sinner would you please
forgive me and save me right now if you
do that today will be your spiritual
birthday the Bible says you must be born
again in John chapter 3 in John chapter
1 it says you get born again you become
a son of God by receiving him when you
receive Jesus Christ you receive his
gift that he died on the cross for you
and you received that for your sins
that's the day you get born into God's
family you become God's child we have
lots of material in our ministry
designed to help strengthen your faith
in the Word of God and hope you grow as
a Christian if you'd like to call or
write our office we'd be glad to send
you a catalog you can get on our website
and get lots of information if you'd
like to schedule a debate I'd be honored
to come just get my itinerary off my
website and find out when I will be in
your area and I'd be glad to come speak
at a college speak at a university speak
at a debate represent the creation side
against as many professors as want to
get together we'll take on ten at a time
that doesn't matter you see God's right
and evolution is wrong
it's pretty simple thank you so much
please don't hesitate to call us if we
can be any help do you want to know more
about how to combat the cutlass theory
of evolution creation science evangelism
offers four great tools that help
strengthen the faith of believers and
win the lost to Christ after 15 years of
teaching high school science dr. Hogan
began creation science evangelism in
1989 we are a ministry that is dedicated
to providing tools which will help you
combat the evolution philosophy that is
destroying the faith of millions every
year
the first tool creation science offers
is their powerful life-changing video
series over the last 12 years well over
a million videotapes of dr. Hovind
seminar have circled the globe they are
reaping a harvest of souls for the
kingdom of Christ as well as helping
restore the faith of many thousands
confused by the evolution propaganda to
which they've been subjected these
videos are available in English Russian
French Spanish Japanese and sign
language the age of the earth first of
the seven part series teaches that God
created the universe about 6,000 years
ago and six literal days but this be
true can it be scientifically proven
that the earth is not millions of years
old this tape gives solid scientific
evidence that the earth is young and
that the Bible is scientifically
accurate how did the environment of the
original creation differ from ours today
and how would this allow men to live
over 900 years can Christians have a
good XY
for the existence of dinosaurs but some
dinosaurs still be alive today these and
many more questions are covered in the
second and third part of the series
evolution has permeated public school
textbooks with false and fraudulent
information this video exposes nearly 30
lies commonly found in textbooks every
public school student teacher and school
board member needs to watch part 4 of
this series find out if you have been
lied to in your textbooks discover the
terrible difference evolutionary beliefs
have made in the past as well as in
recent history in our video number 5
dictators throughout time use their
evolution based philosophies to
rationalize their brutal actions learn
how evolution propaganda is being used
today to prepare people for the new
world order this is just a taste of all
the information the 17 hour seminar
series has to offer also available are
college courses and expand on the
seminars in great detail for those who
can handle a more confrontational
atmosphere our debate series is just for
you I said now mr. Patterson if you
think the tailbone is a vestigial hi
Kent Hovind will pay to have yours
removed dr. Hogan has debated a wide
range of atheists and evolutionists all
over the country you're sure to find
these twelve debates very exciting these
would be perfect to present to that
scientifically minded person who likes
to argue their point
our topical series includes exciting
topics like why evolution is stupid
public school presentation children's
video about dinosaurs the Bible and
health Leviathan the fire-breathing
dragon and many more creation science
also offers a variety of visuals like
the longevity chart which presents the
entire lineage of Adam to Joseph as
given in Genesis it's exciting to see
exactly how many generations were alive
at the same time hundreds of books on a
variety of subjects videos on incredible
creatures that defy evolution t-shirts
fossils and more make creation science
evangelism the one-stop shopping center
for your creation material needs our two
websites ww2 Dino calm and WWI Nisour
Adventureland comm provide our second
tool for evangelism dr. Dino calm is
packed with lots of information from
charts and graphs to articles and
frequently asked questions this is also
where you will find more information on
all of the products CSE has to offer
dinosaur Adventureland calm is great for
the kids they can play lots of fun games
and see unusual rides and activities
located a dinosaur adventure land in
Pensacola Florida thousands visit our
sites regularly to gain insight into
God's creation the third tool available
to you is the live seminars conducted by
dr. Hovind and his son Eric since 1989
dr. Hoeven has held seminars and debates
and hundreds of churches schools and
universities and 49 states and 30
foreign countries his fast paced
Illustrated seminars cover diverse
topics such as evidence for a young
earth how long Adam lived dinosaurs
living with man where races came from
radiometric dating and much more our
fourth tool is the new exciting dinosaur
Adventureland many thousands have come
from all across America to visit our
Museum creation bookstore Science Center
and theme park where God gets the glory
for science are unusual swings rides and
activities each have a science lesson as
well as a spiritual lesson
captivate everyone from age 4 to 94
to order material find out how to
schedule a seminar at your church or get
more information about dinosaur
Adventureland write to us at creation
science evangelism 29 Cummings Road
Pensacola Florida 3 to 503 or call us at
85 oh four seven nine three four six six
or toll-free in the US eight seven seven
four seven nine three four six six