2019-04-24-TEDxJamaica-RobertTrivers.md

the see and self-deception in Kingston
Jamaica who would have imagined it this
very big you see what is the season
self-deception
this seat is lying to others and that
shouldn't be nonverbal it can be verbal
at the leadership and self-deception is
lying to yourself you can deny something
that's true about yourself project it
onto someone else and then attack it in
the other person will end with such an
example now there are two main ways in
which well the function of
self-deception is given in the subtitle
here I believe and I've amassed a lot of
evidence that support the notion that
the primary reason we fool ourselves is
the better the fool of it and there are
two cases in point if I'm lying to you
now about something you actually care
about and you're posting up and better
yet you know me you can watch my eye
movement you can listen to the pitch of
my voice especially if it blows up then
watch for unusual pauses and so on but
if I have lied to myself if I'm
unconscious that I'm practicing
deceptions my words will be surrounded
with the sincerity that it's associated
with honesty
you'll lack those cues for spotting my
reception the second is that we're in
the business of promoting ourselves as
being more been effective than we really
are we elta people more than we do were
more beneficial we're better looking
we're smarter and so on so in that case
we can fool people India into having a
higher image of ourselves than the fact
worn in often shows up in people putting
themselves in the upper half of a
category so eighty percent of high
school students in the u.s. say they're
in the top app for leadership ability
it's not possible
but for self-deception you cannot beat
academia in the United States fully 94%
of professors regard themselves as being
in the top half of their particular and
I plead guilty I can be tired down to a
bed in a backward of UWI hospital and I
still think I'm doing better than half
my colleagues and that's not just a
comment on my college but but this is
just our mouth this is just the way we
flap our boat do we really 70 percent of
us will sing when the top half of good
looks do we really think so or we just
flap in our mouths the next experiment I
think you'll enjoy because it
demonstrates very clearly that something
deeper is going on it's not just
flapping their mouths and this is
whether we think we're better looking
than we really are and these are the
authors eppley and Witcher woman scripts
over here and what they've done then is
with the help of a computer named more
fur with more and more percentage of a
good-looking face which is the average
of 15 good-looking women picked out of a
sample of 60 ok so here is here is the
witch Church who is 20% better-looking
here's half and half 50% more they morph
you with someone who's got craniofacial
syndrome which makes you ugly now they
do the same thing with eppley only he's
not too good-looking to start with
so you have to kind of shift it but
anyway he's getting better-looking here
and even up here in this direction now
here's the game they play and they say
it with you so you've got to imagine
that it's your face and they do it and
they've morphed it now you're sitting in
front of a computer screen blingo
suddenly there are 12 photos in front of
you max for your age and sex and one of
them the human and all you've got to do
is as soon as you spot it hit that
button and then point to it that
controls for people making mistakes okay
but here's the tech in a number of the
runs and they repeated of course the
picture of you is real you in a number
of the runs it's 20% better looking you
and in the number of runs it's 20% of
their you so which do you see first well
you see better looking you first it
takes five percent longer time for a two
spot the real you and five percent
longer still subscribe the ugly you okay
so in your mind's eye you are twenty
percent better looking if they give you
all those fifties at one time that we
saw there and asked you which one you
like most
it's 20 percent better looking and this
is an important feature of deceit and
self perception you don't exactly you
look by thirty percent it's implausible
you don't exaggerate it looks by 10
percent we think you're giving away some
of the benefit so it's about it at
twenty percent now I don't need a social
psychologist to tell me about this
effect because if I'm in a big city I
see it nearly every week I'll be walking
down the street like this talking to a
young and attractive woman not up to
nothing you understand just a lot more
like
like me enough to allow me to stay
nearby right and while I'm walking along
I spot on the other side of her an old
man right here ugly face falling apart
and he's not even really walking he's
more like shambling you know and then of
course I realized that's me
reflected in the store windows so
self-perceived means seen really as
ugliness all right no we use verbiage
also to alter reality one unto the other
so for example one simple trick is
simply whether you make the boys active
or passive okay so if I was doing well
then I say I did this I did that and
benefits rained down on all of you
but if I do poorly I take the passive
voice and I'm a victim of circumstance
and this was perhaps best captured by a
man who ran into a telephone pole in San
Francisco about 20 years ago and it's
reported by the police his description
was as follows the ball was approaching
my park when I attempted to swerve out
of the way and it struck me all right
perfectly legitimate but it shifted the
responsibility to the telephone for now
we know about the importance of words in
Jamaica I direct Safari for example the
rest of movement began in the 30s and it
was a movement of self pride and self
assertion by the dispossessed by the
underpass and by those that were most
African appearance so none of this me
I'll go shop I am on even we sounded too
weak because it reminded them of me so
it's I and I so arrests amount in full
spirit might say something like this I
am on a night I've been smoked a table I
since I see you early all right
and you feel good when you talk like
that so my son is on the internet
looking for Russian sites and he comes
across the rusted minefields slowly
going around the bend getting angrier
and angrier and angry
what is he mad about the wholesale
expropriation of Jamaican culture by the
larger culture with no acknowledgement
no thanks certainly no penny on the
dollar
terms like this next experience hi
I fooled ya
iPad ITV John is IP we got okay there
are other uses that are amusing
there is something from the euphemism
treadmill and which we invented
euphemism for something but then it
comes to to note the old thing so we
have to have a new euphemism
so toilet is too much like what what a
toilet is so now it becomes a bathroom
so you're bathing in there but that's a
little bit too personal so it becomes a
restroom can you taking a nap in there I
called the operator at Rutgers
University to get someone's number and
some young man answered the phone and
said information assistance I thought
I've got the wrong number at first he's
gotten a verbal range they okay now let
me give you another example from social
psychology where we've gotten past near
words there are two ways you can write e
on your forehead and what they do is
they make the person five times and
write because they don't want to
thinking about it they wanted time to
sitting on the side and then just write
e so you can write a other focus E where
I write it like this so you can read it
or you can write a self focused E I
write it like so and I can see through
it in that's an e now most people in
fact write another focus E but what is
interesting is it depends upon the
degree of power they feel and there are
these little tricks where you can induce
a feeling of power which is a temporary
but long enough to produce these effects
or you can't reduce the feeling of low
power so someone with low power about
12% of the time they do an other focus
social to see all the rest is others
hoping but if you're high power you're
three times as likely to be self talking
there's a series of other car lifts that
this inducement of a feeling of power
you recognize facial expressions less
well you remember faces less well you
have a harder time taking the viewpoint
of someone else in a simulated situation
so power itself is inducing a kind of
ignorance and blindness of those
underneath you those underneath I've got
to pay attention to those variable now
it's worse if it's a man because we know
that men in various domains are more
overtime to them than women are over
contrast there's a tendency for all this
to be over countries but it's more Emile
disease so a powerful man is both equal
and overconfident that's a bad
combination and it reminds me of the
fact that self perception often ends
badly it gives you some benefits at the
beginning you fool others you float
along but it ends badly think rules and
gooders
now how soon does this start we know
that it starts we know that it starts
very early in life deception by six
months of age children are already
crying out of context now this guy's
about a year old but sorry but he's
really got exact down on the well so
let's watch him a bit
suffering agony now is audience
disappearance
now trust me that boy would keep that up
all afternoon but this is a TEDx talk
time is limited right now here's a
little boy I loved was about a year of
agent and this shows you how the child
can quickly learn to use a facial
expression in a novel concept
you'll hear the father in the background
saying give me the live son you need
we'll look
now notice you saw the fake one first in
the real one second now we'll just run
through the real the second time it's
the same thing but the father
you look good boy but an actual fact in
the second key and earlier still the
child is Michael's brother to last three
month of pregnancy the child takes over
control some others lemon sugar level
raises raises mother's blood pressure
redistributes the blood around it takes
it away from feet and hands it does this
by producing hormones that are either
identical to or close chemical mimics of
the hormones the mother uses to control
those variables at all other times but
here's a test it produces in hormones at
a thousand times the concentration that
the mother does we believe this is
because of a co-evolutionary struggle
where initially it started pouring in
some extra hormones and then the mother
became inert to them and the offspring
had to add some and the mother again
became deaf because it's not to her
advantage to give the offspring as much
as the offspring once he has other
children's just a parcel her resources
to fashion presence past present future
I should say so we believe that is
escalated it so it affect the child said
mama behold me good the whole day you
see you Harvey but it's hormones and
hormone receptors that are carrying the
argument okay now here's an extremely
important finding and its general does
it up justify the children the smarter
your child is the
they live I will give you the experiment
in a second but if your child is a
little breaks out this is four years old
it's almost time minutes with a little
test they lie a hundred percent of the
time if you have a sole child 65 percent
of the time now what's the experiment
it's out sitting here there's a box
behind the child someone put something
in the box closes it says I leave the
room for a couple minutes do not peek do
that piece well they watch most children
pee then they come in and they say did
you beat and both children like about
80% of but the key is that they lie more
the smarter they are all right similar
effect in monkeys
okay this is this is size of the
neocortex this social part of the brain
but your particular brain size itself if
you wanted and what you see is the
bigger the neocortex the more often they
act receptively in nature this is very
carefully controlled data I won't bother
you with those details but the take-home
message is this intelligent people are
more likely to lie and they're more
likely by logic to practice
self-deception
we might easily imagine and wish it were
otherwise but I don't believe it is
and it means a bright person may have
seems to give because of his or her
brightness but is their self-deception
warping it around in the wrong direction
and sore okay I always believe in ending
with a little bit of self-criticism and
after all if I have a theory of
self-deception that applies to your
self-deception and yours but doesn't
apply to mine there's some deficiency
here there's some bias here so I like to
end the sub pieces now in the US I
almost always end with self-deception a
war because we us are always at war and
self-deception mates and I knew
strong contribution especially to
disastrous war now what am I going to
talk about in Jamaica
there are society level phenomenon of
corruption and is that the 48 thing but
I don't know what's about it I want to
talk about something down at my level so
here's the paradox of the contradiction
we have an island that is Shaka brah
fool
I tell you talk about fool with
beautiful women period at the same time
we have a whole heap of paper
heterosexual men who go berserk at the
thought that two men are giving each
other sexual pleasure what the Rasta
George is going on here well let's add a
little bit of science they manage some
of using experiments in Georgia where
they took a one heterosexual men what's
an a1 heterosexual man that's someone
who has never had a homosexual
experience nor a homosexual thought or
fantasy or soul each set now you give
them a homophobia scale how and here
upset or rotted do they get full verb
male homosexuality and you divide them
into those that are relaxed and do
litter Piper upset and now is the fun
party to show dirty movies but your
first tire participa graph to the base
of each man's wood and the precision of
the the petitioner graph allows precise
measures of changes in diameter okay so
we started off watching six minutes of a
man and a woman making love okay
pornographic film the wood grows
admirably
the entire video there's no difference
between the two groups so I won't tell
you which is we now you'll watch two
women making love and the wood starts
admirably but then it starts sloping off
and it doesn't quite reach up to a man
and a woman again these are
statistically indistinguishable now
you're probably guessing what's down
here this is two men getting it on these
are non homophobic men men that are not
upset and they show a slight and in
significant increase in Woodside here
are the homophobic men would larger and
pick it up here give me the skin
somewhere around here you know now we
know this in the u.s. this is a monthly
occurrence you know that those who are
most hostile towards homosexual get
outed it'd been looked a preacher or a
politician for their secret homosexual
life now we don't know if the laws of
psychology that apply in Georgia also
apply in Jamaica but it's a first
approximation we have to assume so
so that says there they repressed
suppressed and repressed homosexuality
problem on this island and it comes out
in violence now where it comes from you
have to ask someone else I've spoken to
people like Brian chanes see I was born
people that have a lot of insight into
Jamaican society and they talk about
father absent families and the behavior
of the mother when she doesn't have a
father and lay down the law and so on
I have nothing to say about it I just
posed it as a fascist problem of denial
projection and debt attack so the cecum
self perception is something that
applies to all of us at every phase of
our life from our most intimate
relations who are natural
here even to how we talk to ourselves
it's something we can all participate in
because the logic is simple and the
behaviors universal I think